Websites Vary Prices, Deals Based on Users' Information - WSJ.com

Dow Jones Reprints This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only. To order presentation-ready copies for distribution to your colleagues, clients or customers, use the Order Reprints tool at the bottom of any article or visit www.djreprints.com
See a sample reprint in PDF format. 
Order a reprint of this article now

Websites Vary Prices, Deals Based on Users'
Information
By JENNIFER VALENTINO-DEVRIES, JEREMY SINGER-VINE and ASHKAN SOLTANI 
December 24,2012
It was the same Swingline stapler, on the same Staples.com website. But for Kim Wamble, the price was $15.79, while the price on Trude Frizzell's screen, just a few miles away, was $14.29.
A key difference: where Staples seemed to think they were located.
A Wall Street Journal investigation found that the Staples Inc. website displays different prices to people after estimating their locations. More than that, Staples appeared to consider the person's distance from a rival brick-and-mortar store, either OfficeMax Inc. or Office Depot Inc. If rival stores were within 20 miles or so, Staples.com usually showed a discounted price.
What Price Would You See? "How can they get away with that?" said Ms. Frizzell, who works in Bergheim, Texas.
In what appears to be an unintended side effect of Staples' pricing methods—likely a function of retail competition with its rivals—the Journal's testing also showed that areas that tended to see the discounted prices had a higher average income than areas that tended to see higher prices.
Presented with the Journal's findings, Staples acknowledged that it varies its online and in-store prices by geography because of "a variety of factors" including "costs of doing Digits                             business."
How the Journal Tested Prices and Deals Online                            For years, the Internet, with its promise of quick comparison shopping, has granted people a certain power over retailers. At the click of a button, shoppers could find a better deal elsewhere, no travel required.
t giving way to an online world that, in reality, is increasingly taliorea ana targetea. vveasites are aaopting techniques to glean information about visitors to their sites, in real time, and then deliver different versions of the Web to different people. Prices change, products get swapped out, wording is modified, and there is little way for the typical website user to spot it when it happens.

Websites Vary Prices, Deals Based on Users’ Information - WSJ.com

The Journal identified several companies, including Staples,
Getting Different Deals Online i Discover Financial Services, Rosetta Stone Inc. and Home Staples.com Homedepet.com Rosettastone.com Depot Inc., that were consistently adjusting prices and ae eta 8 displaying different product offers based on a range of characteristics that could be discovered about the user. Office Depot, for example, told the Journal that it uses "customers' browsing history and geolocation" to vary the offers and products it displays to a visitor to its site.

Patan iy Barb Offering different prices to different people is legal, with a few exceptions for race-based discrimination and other sensitive SnapSafe; Home Depot; Rosetta Stone situations. Several companies pointed out that their online price-tweaking simply mirrors the real world. Regular shops routinely adjust their prices to account for local demand, competition, store location and so on. Nobody is surprised if, say, a gallon of gas is cheaper at the same chain, one town over. But price-changing online isn't popular among shoppers. Some 76% of American adults have said it would bother them to find out that other people paid a lower price for the same product, according to the Annenberg Public Policy Center at the University of Pennsylvania.
"I think it's very discriminatory," said Ms. Wamble, an Insurance account manager in Boerne, Texas, who priced the " Swingline stapler for the Journal this month. She was just 10 miles or so down the road from Ms. Frizzell, but she saw
ya higher prices on the Staples website than Ms. Frizzell did for all five products tested. Items tested included a pack of Bic pens, a case of orange masking tape, a set of crimped-end mailing tubes and a big safe.
Staples.com appears to tw eak prices based ona. lt remains unclear precisely what formula Staples used to set person's proximity to rival stores. In Texas, Trude online prices. Staples declined to answer detailed questions vomvated v ee Womble “ight, juste fow miles about the findings. It told the Journal that "in-store and online aw ay. Catalin Abagiu for The Wall Street Journal (2) prices do vary by geography due to a variety of factors, including rent, labor, distribution and other costs of doing business."
It is possible that Staples’ online-pricing formula uses other factors that the Journal didn't identify. The
Journal tested to see whether price was tied to different characteristics including population, local income,
proximity to a Staples store, race and other demographic factors. Statistically speaking, by far the strongest
correlation involved the distance to a rival's store from the center of a ZIP Code. That single factor appeared
to explain upward of 90% of the pricing pattern.
What economists call price discrimination—when companies offer different prices to different people based
on their perceived willingness to pay—is commonplace and can be beneficial. Movie theaters give senior-
citizen discounts. One traveler's willingness to pay top dollar for an airplane seat might mean other people
will pay less.
In other cases, though, shoppers can be the loser. That same airline might easily just pocket the big
spender's extra money and leave other prices unchanged.
Websites Vary Prices, Deals Based on Users’ Information - WSJ.com
Of course, not all price differences are instances of price discrimination. Prices driven down by competition wouldn't generally be considered discriminatory, for example. Three Years of Privacy Insights > Basing online prices on geography can make sense for various reasons, from shipping costs to local popularity of a elke = "he Wall Street Journal is particular item. Some retailers might naturally cluster in conducting a long-running a investigation into the profound specific areas as well—a prosperous suburb, say—boosting transformation of personal privacy the competitive pressure to discount. in America.
But using geography as a pricing tool can also reinforce
Selected findings: patterns that e-commerce had promised to erase: prices that 
The Wall Street Journal reconstructs the are higher in areas with less competition, including rural or
clash over the counterterrorism program t diminish he | ' | i
within the administration of President Barack poor areas. It diminishes the Internet's role as an equalizer. Obama. 
Companies today are increasingly tying In the Journal's examination of Staples’ online pricing, the
people's real-life identities to their online weighted average income among ZIP Codes that mostly
browsing habits. received discount prices was roughly $59,900, based on Two students are outed as gay— provoking a Internal Revenue Service data. ZIP Codes that saw generally
crisis within their families—by a Facebook
privacy loophole . (10/12/12) high prices had a lower weighted average income, $48,700. Suspicious spouses are taking
investigations into their own hands as Staples didn't comment on the income split beyond saying Snooping technologies become cheaperand that the company offers a low-price guarantee.
easier to use. eens iene’ aes are now pang Online businesses have experimented with tailored offers racked not only by the government, but also by repo men who hope to profit from the since the dawn of the Internet era. In 1997, a startup called
information. Personify sold software that tried to personalize
Web pages Google bypassed the privacy settings on for shoppers. For example, people taking a certain path millions of Web browsers on Apple iPhones through a site could be tagged as price-conscious and be and computers— tracking the online activities of people who intended that kind of shown low-end items, said Eileen Gittins, Personify's former monitoring to be blocked. chief executive. The government follows the movements of mousan’s or Am omens a year The idea was more advanced than the technology could monitorin eir ce one recoras. 
support at the time," said Ms. Gittins. Today she runs an
iPhone and Android apps secretly shared i Blurb. that let book 
data about their users, a Journal investigation online company, Blurb, that lets people make books using
found. (12/10/10) their own photos. Top apps on Facebook transmit personal identifying details to tracking companies, a In 2000, Amazon.com Inc. infuriated many customers when it Journal investigation found. (70/18/10) sold DVDs to different people for different prices. Amazon Plus, the global surveillance bazaar , a called it merely a test and ultimately refunded the price secretive phone-tracking "stingray" and
RapLeaf'ss clever way of figuring out Web difference to people who paid more.
surfers' realnames. See full privacy coverage In 2010, the Journal reported that Capital One Financial Corp.
was using personalization technology to decide which credit
cards to show first-time visitors to its website. Recent Journal follow-up testing indicated that Capital One
was showing different users different cards first—either those for "excellent credit" or "average credit." Capital One says it gathers data about visitors while they are on its website and uses this information to
suggest different products to them. "We do not use any of this data in credit decisioning or underwriting," a Capital One spokeswoman said. "We're making an educated guess about what we think consumers will like."
Websites Vary Prices, Deals Based on Users’ Information - WSJ.com 
This year, researchers in Spain studied more than 200 online
retailers and found a handful of examples of price differences
— including at Staples within Massachusetts—that appeared
to be based on location and other factors. Those findings
suggest that Staples' price adjustments have been present at
least since this summer.
It is difficult for online shoppers to know why, or even if, they are being offered different deals from other
people. Many sites switch prices at lightning speed in response to competitors’ offerings and other factors, a
practice known as "dynamic pricing." Other sites test different prices but do so without regard to the buyer's characteristics.
To find differences that weren't purely the result of dynamic pricing or randomized tests, the Journal
conducted preliminary scans by simulating visits from different computers to a variety of e-commerce sites.
lf a website showed different prices or offers, the Journal then analyzed the site's computer code and
conducted follow-up testing.
The Journal's tests, which were conducted in phases between August and December, indicated that some
big-name retailers are experimenting with offering different prices and products to different users.
some sites, for example, gave discounts based on whether or not a person was using a mobile device. A
person searching for hotels from the Web browser of an iPhone or Android phone on travel sites Orbitz and
CheapTickets would see discounts of as much as 50% off the list price, Orbitz said.
Both sites are run by Orbitz Worldwide Inc., which in fact markets the differences as "mobile steals." Orbitz
says the deals are also available on the iPad if a person installs the Orbitz app.
"Many hotels have proven willing to provide discounts for mobile sites," said Chris Chiames, Orbitz's vice
president of corporate affairs. Hotels on Orbitz mobile sites also offer discounts "that might target shoppers
in a specific geographic region," as determined by the physical location of the user, as well as "other
factors."
Often, sites tailored results by geography. In the tests, Discover, for instance, showed a prominent offer for
the company's new "it" card to computers connecting from cities including Denver, Kansas City, Mo., and
Dallas, Texas. Computers connecting from Scranton, Penn., Kingsport, Tenn., and Los Angeles didn't see
the same offer.
A Discover spokeswoman said that the company was testing the card, but that for competitive reasons, it
wouldn't comment further on its "acquisition strategy" for new customers.
At home-improvement site Lowe's Cos., prices depend on location. For example, a refrigerator in the
Journal's tests cost $449 in Chicago, Los Angeles and Ashburn, Va., but $499 in seven other test cities.
Lowe's said online shoppers receive the lower of the online store price or the price at their local Lowe's store
as indicated by their ZIP Code.
Home Depot's website offered price variations that appeared to be based on the nearest brick-and-mortar
store as well. A 250-foot spool of electrical wiring fell into six pricing groups, including $70.80 in Ashtabula,
Ohio; $72.45 in Erie, Pa.; $75.98 in Olean, N.Y and $77.87 in Monticello, N.Y.
Websites Vary Prices, Deals Based on Users’ Information -WSJ.com
The company said it uses "IP address," a number assigned to devices that connect to the Internet, to try to
match users to the closest store and align online prices accordingly.
Location also seemed to be important for some international companies. The Journal saw Rosetta Stone,
which sells software for learning languages, offering discounts of as much as 20% for people who bought
multiple levels of its German lessons from certain locations in the U.S. or Canada, but not others from the
U.K. or Argentina.
Rosetta Stone said it sometimes tests and offers different product "bundles" in different places. It also
personalizes its suggestions based on how the visitor gets to the site, Rosetta Stone said—whether from a
search engine, a social-media link, a mobile device or a PC. "We are increasingly focused on segmentation
and targeting," a spokesman said. "Every customer is different."
The differences found on the Staples website presented a complex pricing scheme. The Journal simulated
visits to Staples.com from all of the more than 42,000 U.S. ZIP Codes, testing the price of a Swingline stapler
20 times in each. In addition, the Journal tested more than 1,000 different products in 10 selected ZIP Codes,
10 times in each location.
The Journal saw as many as three different prices for individual items. How frequently a simulated visitor
saw low and high prices appeared to be tied to the person's ZIP Code. Testing suggested that Staples tries
to deduce people's ZIP Codes by looking at their computer's IP address. This can be accurate, but isn't
foolproof.
In the Journal's tests, ZIP Codes whose center was farther than 20 miles from a Staples competitor saw
higher prices 67% of the time. By contrast, ZIP Codes within 20 miles of a rival saw the high price least often,
only 12% of the time.
Staples.com showed higher prices most often—8&6% of the time—when the ZIP Code actually had a brick-
and-mortar Staples store in it, but was also far from a competitor's store. In calculating these percentages,
the Journal excluded New York City and used the more than 29,000 "standard" ZIP Codes in the 50 states
and District of Columbia. This meant things like ZIP Codes with only post-office boxes weren't counted.
Prices varied for about a third of the more than 1,000 randomly selected Staples.com products tested. The
discounted and higher prices differed by about 8% on average.
There were a few areas of the U.S. and its territories that offer exceptions. The Journal found that Puerto
Rico was generally shown the higher prices no matter how close the ZIP Code was to local OfficeMax or
Office Depot outlets. For Guam, on the other hand, tests of Staples.com almost always returned the lower
prices, even though the nearest U.S. OfficeMax or Office Depot is listed online as being in Hawaii, nearly
4,000 miles away.
New York City, too, appeared to be a special case. Tests of Staples.com using ZIP Codes in the boroughs of
the Bronx, Manhattan and Staten Island consistently saw higher prices, while Brooklyn and Queens saw
almost only the discounted prices. This despite the fact that all parts of New York City look to be within 20
miles of a Staples competitor, according to the websites.
As a final test, the Journal ordered two separate Swingline staplers from Staples.com, from two nearby ZIP
Codes—one costing $14.29 and the other one $15.79. The staplers arrived the same day. They appear to be
indistinguishable from one another and do an equally thorough job of stapling.
Websites Vary Prices, Deals Based on Users’ Information - WSJ.com
Write to Jennifer Valentino-DeVries at Jennifer. Valentino-DeVries@wsj.com
Copyright 2013 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only. Distribution and use of this material are governed by our Subscriber Agreement and by
copyright law. For non-personal use or to order multiple copies, please contact Dow Jones Reprints at 1-800-843-0008 or visit